Chapter 1
LOG ENTRY: SOL 6
I’m pretty much fucked.
That’s my considered opinion.
Fucked.
Six days in to what should be a greatest two months of my life, and
it’s turned in to a nightmare.
I don’t even know who’ll read this. I guess someone will find it
eventually. Maybe a hundred years from now.
For the record… I didn’t die on Sol 6. Certainly the rest of the crew
thought I did, and I can’t blame them. Maybe there’ll be a day of national
mourning for me, and my Wikipedia page will say “Mark Watney is the
only human being to have died on Mars.”
And it’ll be right, probably. Cause I’ll surely die here. Just not on Sol
6 when everyone thinks I did.
Let’s see… where do I begin?
The Ares program. Mankind reaching out to Mars to send people to
another planet for the very first time and expand the horizons of
humanity blah, blah, blah. The Ares 1 crew did their thing and came back
heroes. They got the parades and fame and love of the world.
Ares 2 did the same thing, in a different location on Mars. They got a
firm handshake and a hot cup of coffee when they got home.
Ares 3. Well. That was my mission. Well, not mine per se.
Commander Lewis was in charge. I was just one of her crew. Actually, I
was the very lowest ranked member of the crew. I would only be “in
command” of the mission if I were the only remaining person.
What do you know? I’m in command.
I wonder if this log will be recovered before the rest of the crew die of
old age? I presume they got back to Earth all right. Well, guys, if you’re
reading this: It wasn’t your fault. You did what you had to do. In your
position I would have done the same thing. I don’t blame you, and I’m
glad you survived.
I guess I should explain how Mars missions work, for any layman
who may be reading this. We got to earth orbit the normal way, through
an ordinary ship to Hermes. All the Ares missions use Hermes to get to
and from Mars. It’s really big and cost a lot so NASA only built one.
Once we got to Hermes, four additional unmanned missions brought
us fuel and supplies while we prepared for our trip. Once everything was
a go, we set out for Mars. But not very fast. Gone are the days of heavy
chemical fuel burns and trans-Mars injection orbits.
Hermes is powered by ion engines. They throw Argon out the back of
the ship really fast to get a tiny amount of acceleration. The thing is, it
doesn't take much reactant mass, so a little Argon (and a nuclear reactor
to power things) let us accelerate constantly the whole way there. You'd
be amazed at how fast you can get going with a tiny acceleration over a
long time.
I could regale you with tales of how we had great fun on the trip, but I
won’t. We did have fun, but I don’t feel like reliving it right now. Suffice
it to say we got to Mars 124 days later without strangling each other.
From there, we took the MDV (Mars Descent Vehicle) to the surface.
The MDV is basically a big can with some light thrusters and parachutes
attached. Its sole purpose is to get six humans from Mars orbit to the
surface without killing any of them.
And now we come to the real trick of Mars exploration: Having all
our shit there in advance.
A total of 14 unmanned missions deposited everything we would need
for surface operations. They tried their best to land all the supply vessels
in the same general area, and did a reasonably good job. Supplies aren’t
nearly so fragile as humans and can hit the ground really hard. But they
tended to bounce around a lot.
Naturally, they didn’t send us to Mars until they’d confirmed all the
supplies had made it to the surface and their containers weren’t breached.
Start to finish, including supply missions, a Mars mission takes about 3
years. In fact, there were Ares 3 supplies en route to Mars while the Ares
2 crew were on their way home.
The most important piece of the advance supplies, of course, was the
MAV. The “Mars Ascent Vehicle.” That was how we would get back to
Hermes after surface operations were complete. The MAV was softlanded (as opposed to the balloon bounce-fest the other supplies had). Of
course, it was in constant communication with Houston, and if there were
any problems with it, we would pass by Mars and go back to Earth
without ever landing.
The MAV is pretty cool. Turns out, through a neat set of chemical
reactions with the Martian atmosphere, for every kilogram of hydrogen
you bring to Mars, you can make 13 kilograms of fuel. It’s a slow
process, though. It takes 24 months to fill the tank. That’s why they sent
it long before we got here.
You can imagine how disappointed I was when I discovered the MAV
was gone.
It was a ridiculous sequence of events that led to me almost dying.
Then an even more ridiculous sequence that led to me surviving.
The mission is designed to handle sandstorm gusts up to 150 km/hr.
So Houston got understandably nervous when we got whacked with 175
km/hr winds. We all got in our suits and huddled in the middle of the
Hab, just in case it lost pressure. But the Hab wasn’t the problem.
The MAV is a spaceship. It has a lot of delicate parts. It can put up
with storms to a certain extent but it can’t just get sandblasted forever.
After an hour and a half of sustained wind, NASA gave the order to abort.
Nobody wanted to stop a month-long mission after only six days but if
the MAV took any more punishment we’d all get stranded down here.
We had to go out in the storm to get from the Hab to the MAV. That
was going to be risky, but what choice did we have?
Everyone made it but me.
Our main communications dish, which relayed signals from the Hab
to Hermes, acted like a parachute, getting torn from its foundation and
carried with the torrent. Along the way, it crashed through the reception
antenna array. Then one of those long thin antennae slammed in to me
end first. It tore through my suit like a bullet through butter and I felt the
worst pain of my life as it ripped open my side. I vaguely remember
suddenly having the wind knocked out of me (pulled out of me, really)
and my ears popping painfully as the pressure of my suit escaped.
The last thing I remember was seeing Johanssen hopelessly reaching
out toward me.
I awoke to the oxygen alarm in my suit. A steady, obnoxious beeping
that eventually roused me from a deep and profound desire to just fucking
die.
The storm had abated; I was face down, almost totally buried in sand.
As I groggily came to, I wondered why I wasn’t more dead.
The antenna had enough force to punch through the suit and my side,
but then it got stopped by my pelvis. So there was only one hole in the
suit (and a hole in me, of course).
I had been knocked back quite a ways and rolled down a steep hill.
Somehow I landed face down, which forced the antenna to a strongly
oblique angle that put a lot of torque on the hole in the suit. It made a
weak seal.
Then, the copious blood from my wound trickled down toward the
hole. As the blood reached the site of the breach, the water in it quickly
evaporated from the airflow and low pressure, leaving only a gunky
residue behind. More blood came in behind it and was also reduced to
gunk. Eventually, the blood sealed the gaps around the hole and reduced
the leak to something the suit could counteract.
The suit did its job admirably. Seeing the drop in pressure, it
constantly flooded itself with air from my nitrogen tank to equalize. Once
the leak became manageable, it only had to trickle new air in slowly the
relieve the air lost.
After a while, the CO2 (carbon dioxide) absorbers in the suit were
expended. That’s really the limiting factor to life support. Not the
amount of oxygen you bring with you, but the amount of CO2 you can
remove. In the Hab, we had the Oxygenator, a large piece of equipment
that could break CO2 apart and give the oxygen back. But the spacesuits
had to be portable, so they used a simple chemical absorption process
with expendable filters. I’d been asleep long enough that my filters were
useless.
The suit saw this problem and moved in to an emergency mode the
engineers call “bloodletting”. Having no way to separate out the CO2, the
suit deliberately vented air to the Martian atmosphere, then back-filled
with nitrogen. Between the breach and the bloodletting, it quickly ran out
of nitrogen. All it had left was my oxygen tank.
So it did the only thing it could to keep me alive. It started backfilling with pure oxygen. I now risked dying from oxygen toxicity, as the
excessively high amount of oxygen threatened to burn up my nervous
system, lungs, and eyes. An ironic death for someone with a leaky space
suit: too much oxygen.
Every step of the way would have had beeping alarms, alerts, and
warnings. But it was the high-oxygen warning that woke me.
The sheer volume of training for a space mission is astounding. I
spent a week back on Earth practicing emergency space suit drills. I knew
what to do.
Carefully reaching to the side of my helmet, I got the breach kit. It’s
nothing more than a funnel with a valve at the small end, and an
unbelievably sticky resin on the wide end. The idea is you have the valve
open and stick the wide end over a hole. The air can escape through the
valve, so it doesn’t interfere with the resin making a good seal. Then you
close the valve and you’ve sealed the breach.
The tricky part was getting the antenna out of the way. I pulled it out
as fast as I could, wincing as the sudden pressure drop dizzied me and
made the wound in my side scream in agony.
I got the breach kit over the hole and sealed it. It held. The suit backfilled the missing air with yet more oxygen. Checking my arm readouts, I
saw the suit was now at 85% oxygen. For reference, Earth’s atmosphere
is about 21%. I’d be ok, so long as I didn’t spend too much time like that.
I stumbled up the hill back toward the Hab. As I crested the rise, I saw
something that made me very happy and something that made me very
sad: The Hab was in-tact (yay!) and the MAV was gone (boo!).
Right that moment I knew I was screwed. But I didn’t want to just die
out on the surface. I limped back to the Hab and fumbled my way in to an
airlock. As soon as it equalized, I threw off my helmet.
Entering the Hab, I doffed the suit and got my first good look at the
injury. It would need stitches. Fortunately, all of us had been trained in
basic medical procedures, and the Hab had excellent medical supplies. A
quick shot of local anesthetic, irrigate the wound, 9 stitches and I was
done. I’d be taking antibiotics for a couple of weeks, but other than that
I’d be fine.
I knew it was hopeless, but I tried firing up the communication array.
No signal, of course. The primary satellite dish had broken off,
remember? And it took the reception antennae with it. The Hab had
secondary and tertiary communication systems, but they were both just
for talking to the MAV, which would use its much more powerful
systems to relay to Hermes. Thing is, that only works if the MAV is still
around.
I had no way to talk to Hermes. In time, I could locate the dish out on
the surface, but it would take weeks for me to rig up any repairs, and that
would be too late. In an abort, Hermes would leave orbit within 24 hours.
The orbital dynamics made the trip safer and shorter the earlier you left,
so why wait for no reason just to make the trip take longer?
Checking out my suit, I saw the antenna had plowed through my biomonitor computer. When on an EVA, all the crew’s suits are networked
so we can see each others status. The rest of the crew would have seen the
pressure in my suit drop to nearly 0, followed immediately by my biosigns going flat. Add to that I was sent tumbling down a hill with a spear
through me in the middle of a sandstorm… yeah. They thought I was
dead. How could they not?
They may have even had a brief discussion about recovering my body,
but regulations were clear. In the event a crewman died on Mars, he
stayed on Mars. Leaving his body behind reduced weight for the MAV on
the trip back. That meant more disposable fuel and a larger margin of
error for the return thrust. No point in giving that up for sentimentality.
So that’s the situation. I’m stranded on Mars. I have no way to
communicate with Hermes or Earth. Everyone thinks I’m dead. I’m in a
Hab designed to last 31 days.
If the Oxygenator breaks down, I’ll suffocate. If the Water Reclaimer
breaks down, I’ll die of thirst. If the Hab breaches, I’ll just kind of
explode. If none of those things happen, I’ll eventually run out of food
and starve to death.
So yeah. I’m fucked.
Chapter 2
LOG ENTRY: SOL 7
Ok, I’ve had a good night’s sleep, and things don’t seem as hopeless
as they did yesterday.
Today I took stock of supplies, and did a quick EVA to check up on
the external equipment. Here’s my situation:
The surface mission was supposed to be 31 days. For redundancy, the
supply probes had enough food to last the whole crew 56 days. That way
if one or two probes had problems, we'd still have enough food to
complete the mission.
We were six days in when all hell broke loose, so that leaves enough
food to feed six people for 50 days. I’m just one guy, so it’ll last me 300
days. And that’s if I don’t ration it. So I’ve got a fair bit of time.
The Hab stood up to the storm without any problems. Outside, things
aren’t so rosy. I can’t find the satellite dish; it probably got blown
kilometers away.
The MAV is gone, of course. My crewmates took it up to Hermes.
Though the bottom half (the landing stage) is still there. No reason to
take that back up when weight is the enemy. It includes the landing gear,
the fuel plant, and anything else NASA figured it wouldn’t need for the
trip back up to orbit.
The MDV is on its side and there’s a breach in the hull. Looks like the
storm ripped the cowling off the reserve chute (which we didn’t have to
use on landing). Once the chute was exposed it dragged the MDV all over
the place, smashing it against every rock in the area. Not that the MDV
would be much use to me. Its thrusters can’t even lift its own weight. But
it might have been valuable for parts. Might still be.
Both rovers are half-buried in sand, but they’re in good shape
otherwise. Their pressure seals are in-tact. Makes sense. Operating
procedure if a storm hits is to stop motion and wait for the storm to pass.
They’re made to stand up to punishment. I’ll be able to dig them out with
a day or so of work.
I’ve lost communication with the weather stations, placed a kilometer
away from the Hab in 4 directions. They might be in perfect working
order for all I know. The Hab’s communications are so weak right now it
probably can’t even reach a kilometer.
The solar cell array was covered it in sand, rendering it useless (hint:
solar cells need sunlight to make electricity). But once I swept them off,
they returned to full efficiency. Whatever I end up doing, I’ll have plenty
of power for it. 200 square meters of solar cells, with hydrogen fuel cells
to store plenty of reserve. All I need to do is sweep them off every few
days.
Things indoors are great, thanks to the Hab’s sturdy design.
I ran a full diagnostic on the Oxygenator. Twice. It’s perfect. If
anything goes wrong with it, there is a short-term spare I can use. But it’s
solely for emergency use while repairing the main one. The spare doesn’t
actually pull CO2 apart and recapture the oxygen. It just absorbs the CO2
the same way the spacesuits do. It’s intended to last 5 days before it
saturates the filters, which means 30 days for me (just one person
breathing, instead of six). So there’s some insurance there.
The Water Reclaimer is working fine, too. The bad news is there’s no
backup. If it stops working, I’ll be drinking reserve water while I rig up a
primitive distillery to boil piss. Also, I’ll lose half a liter of water per day
to breathing until the humidity in the Hab reaches its maximum and water
starts condensing on every surface. Then I’ll be licking the walls. Yay.
Anyway, for now, no problems with the Water Reclaimer.
So yeah. Food, water, shelter all taken care of. I’m going to start
rationing food right now. Meals are pretty minimal already, but I think I
can eat a 3/4 portion per meal and still be all right. That should turn my
300 days of food in to 400. Foraging around the medical area, I found the
main bottle of vitamins. There’s enough multivitamins there to last years.
So I won’t have any nutritional problems (though I’ll still starve to death
when I’m out of food, no matter how many vitamins I take).
The medical area has morphine for emergencies. And there’s enough
there for a lethal dose. I’m not going to slowly starve to death, I’ll tell
you that. If I get to that point, I’ll take an easier way out.
Everyone on the mission had two specialties. I’m a botanist and
mechanical engineer. Basically, I was the mission’s fix-it man who
played with plants. The mechanical engineering might save my life if
something breaks.
I’ve been thinking about how to survive this. It’s not completely
hopeless. There’ll be humans back on Mars in about four years when Ares
4 arrives (assuming they didn’t cancel the program in the wake of my
“death”).
Ares 4 will be landing at the Schiaparelli Crater, which is about
3,200km away from my location here in the Acidalia Planitia. No way for
me to get there on my own. But if I could communicate, I might be able
to get a rescue. Not sure how they’d manage that with the resources on
hand, but NASA has a lot of smart people.
So that’s my mission now. Find a way to communicate with Earth. If I
can’t manage that, find a way to communicate with Hermes when it
returns in 4 years with the Ares 4 crew.
Of course, I don’t have any plan for surviving 4 years on 1 year of
food. But one thing at a time here. For now, I’m well fed and have a
purpose: “Fix the damn radio”.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 10
Well, I’ve done three EVAs and haven’t found any hint of the
communication dish.
I dug out one of the rovers and had a good drive around, but after days
of wandering I think it’s time to give up. The storm probably blew the
dish far away and then erased any drag-marks or scuffs that might have
led to a trail. Probably buried it, too.
I spent most of today out at what’s left of the communication array.
It’s really a sorry sight. I may as well yell toward Earth for all the good
that damned thing will do me.
I could throw together a rudimentary dish out of metal I find around
the base, but this isn’t some walkie-talkie I’m working with here.
Communicating from Mars to Earth is a pretty big deal, and requires
extremely specialized equipment. I won’t be able to whip something up
with tinfoil and gum.
I need to ration my EVAs as well as food. The CO2 filters are not
cleanable. Once they’re saturated, they’re done. The mission accounted
for a 4-hour EVA per crewmember per day. Fortunately, CO2 filters are
light and small so NASA had the luxury of sending more than we needed.
All told, I have about 1500 hours worth of CO2 filters. After that, any
EVAs I do will have to be managed with bloodletting the air.
1500 hours may sound like a lot, but I’m faced with spending at least
4 years here if I’m going to have any hope of rescue, with a minimum of
several hours per week dedicated to sweeping off the solar array.
Anyway. No needless EVAs.
In other news, I’m starting to come up with an idea for food. My
botany background may come in useful after all.
Why bring a botanist to Mars? After all, it’s famous for not having
anything growing here. Well, the idea was to figure out how well things
grow in Martian gravity, and see what, if anything, we can do with
Martian soil. The short answer is: quite a lot… almost. Martian soil has
the basic building blocks needed for plant growth, but there’s a lot of
stuff going on in Earth soil that Mars soil doesn’t have, even when it’s
placed in an Earth-atmosphere and given plenty of water. Bacterial
activity, certain nutrients provided by animal life, etc. None of that is
happening on Mars. One of my tasks for the mission was to see how
plants grow here, in various combinations of Earth or Mars soil and
atmosphere.
That’s why I have a small amount of Earth soil and a bunch of plant
seeds with me.
I can’t get too excited, however. It’s about the amount of soil you’d
put in a window planter-box, and the only seeds I have are a few species
of grass and ferns. They’re the most rugged and easily grown plants on
earth, so NASA picked them as the test subjects.
So I have two problems: not enough dirt, and nothing edible to plant
in it.
But I’m a botanist, damn it. I should be able to find a way to make
this happen. If I don’t, I’ll be a really hungry botanist in about a year.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 11
I wonder how the Cubs are doing.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 14
I got my undergrad degree at the University of Chicago. Half the
people who studied botany were hippies who thought they could return to
some natural world system. Somehow feeding 7 billion people through
pure gathering. They spent most of their time working out better ways to
grow pot. I didn’t like them. I’ve always been in it for the science, not for
any New World Order bullshit.
When they made compost heaps and tried to conserve every little
ounce of living matter, I laughed at them. “Look at the silly hippies!” I
would scoff. “Look at their pathetic attempts to simulate a complex
global ecosystem in their back yard.”
Of course now I’m doing exactly that. I’m saving every scrap of
biomatter I can find. Every time I finish a meal, the leftovers go to the
compost bucket. As for other biological material…
The Hab has sophisticated toilets. Shit is usually vaccum-dried, then
accumulated in sealed bags to be discarded on the surface.
Not any more!
In fact, I even did an EVA to recover the previous bags of shit from
before the crew left. Being completely desiccated, this particular shit
didn’t have bacteria in it anymore, but it still had complex proteins and
would serve as useful manure. Adding it to water and active bacteria
would quickly get it inundated, replacing any population killed by the
Toilet Of Doom.
I found a big container and filled it with a bit of water, then added the
dried shit. Since then, I’ve added my own shit to it as well. The worse it
smells, the more successful things are going. That’s the bacteria at work!
Once I get some Martian soil in here, I can mix in the shit and spread
it out. Then I can sprinkle the Earth soil on top. You might not think that
would be an important step, but it is. There are dozens of species of
bacteria living in Earth soil, and they're critical to plant growth. They'll
spread out and breed like... well, like a bacterial infection..
Within a week, the Martian soil will be ready for plants to germinate
in. But I won’t plant yet. I’ll spread it out over a doubled area. It’ll
“infect” the new Martian soil. After another week, I’ll double it again.
And so on. Of course, all the while, I’ll be adding all new manure to the
effort.
My asshole is doing as much to keep me alive as my brain.
This isn’t a new concept I just came up with. People have speculated
on how to make crop soil out of Martian dirt for decades. I’ll just be
putting it to the test for the first time.
I searched through the food supplies and found all sorts of things that
I can plant. Peas, for instance. Plenty of beans, too. I also found several
potatoes. If *any* of them can still germinate after their ordeal, that’ll be
great. With a nearly infinite supply of vitamins, all I need are calories of
any kind to survive.
The total floor-space of the Hab is about 92 square meters. I plan to
dedicate all of it to this endeavor. I don’t mind walking on dirt. It’ll be a
lot of work, but I’m going to need to cover the entire floor to a depth of
10 cm. That means I’ll have to transport 9.2 cubic meters of Martian soil
in to the Hab. I can get maybe 1/10th of a cubic meter in through the
airlock at a time, and it’ll be backbreaking work to collect it. But in the
end, if everything goes to plan, I’ll have 92 square meters of croppable
soil.
Hell yeah I’m a botanist! Fear my botany powers!
LOG ENTRY: SOL 15
Ugh! This is backbreaking work!
I spent 12 hours today on EVAs to bring dirt in to the Hab. I only
managed to cover a small corner of the base, maybe 5 square meters. At
this rate it’ll take me weeks to get all the soil in. But hey, time is one
thing I’ve got.
The first few EVAs were pretty inefficient; me filling small
containers and bringing them in through the airlock. Then I got wise and
just put one big container in the airlock itself and filled that with small
containers till it was full. That sped things up a lot because the airlock
takes about 10 minutes to get through.
I ache all over. And the shovels I have are made for taking samples,
not heavy digging. My back is killing me. I foraged in the medical
supplies and found some Vicodin. I took it about 10 minutes ago. Should
be kicking in soon.
Anyway, it’s nice to see progress. Time to start getting the bacteria to
work on these minerals. After lunch. No 3/4 ration today. I’ve earned a
full meal.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 16
One complication I hadn’t though of: Water.
Turns out being on the surface of Mars for a few million years
eliminates all the water in the soil. My master’s degree in botany makes
me pretty sure plants need wet dirt to grow in. Not to mention the
bacteria that has to live in it first.
Fortunately, I have water. But not as much as I want. To be viable,
soil needs 40 liters of water per cubic meter. My overall plan calls for 9.2
cubic meters of soil. So I’ll eventually need 368 liters of water to feed it.
The Hab has an excellent Water Reclaimer. Best technology available
on Earth. So NASA figured “why send a lot of water up there? Just send
enough for an emergency.” Humans need 3 liters of water per day to be
comfortable. They gave us 50 liters each. There are 300 liters total in the
Hab.
Looks like I won’t be able to cover the whole surface of the Hab with
fertile soil. I’m willing to dedicate all but an emergency 50 liters to the
cause. That means I can feed 62.5 square meters at a depth of 10cm.
About 2/3 of the Hab’s floor. It’ll have to do. Anyway, I’ve only got a
paltry 5 square meters covered at the moment.
After that, things got disgusting. I spent three hours spreading shit on
Martian sand. I didn’t have to do it with my hands, at least.
I spread the sand out in a corner of the Hab, about 10cm thick. I
wadded up a few blankets and uniforms from my departed crewmates to
serve as one edge of a planter box (with the curved walls of the Hab being
the rest of the perimeter). Then I sacrificed 20 liters of precious water to
the dirt gods.
5 square meters was about right for the amount of manure I had
handy. I dumped my big container o’ shit on to the soil and nearly puked
from the smell.
That smell’s going to stick around for a while, too. It’s not like I can
open a window. Still, you get used to it. I mixed this soil and shit together
with a shovel, and spread it out evenly again. Then I sprinkled the Earth
soil on top. Get to work, bacteria. I’m counting on you.
In other news, today is Thanksgiving. My family will be gathering in
Chicago for the usual feast at my parent's house. My guess is it won't be
much fun, what with me having died 11 days ago. Hell, they probably just
got done gathering for my funeral.
I wonder if they'll ever find out what really happened.
